---
title: Why You Should Write an Emulator
description: How emulator development teaches vital skills
tags: [programming, projects]
---

One of my favorite quotes is part of [The Cult of Done Manifesto](https://medium.com/@bre/the-cult-of-done-manifesto-724ca1c2ff13) by Bre Pettis and Kio Stark:

> Those without dirty hands are wrong. Doing something makes you right.

So do it. Go write an emulator. Pick a programming language. Pick a basic CPU architecture: either something retro like the [6502](https://www.pagetable.com/c64ref/6502/) or [Z80](https://clrhome.org/table/), or something modern but still simple like the [RISC-V](https://riscv.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/riscv-spec-v2.2.pdf) base integer instruction set, or something designed for teaching like [Pep/9](https://github.com/StanWarford/pep9). Implement a basic model of its registers and a simple block memory interface. Start with a few opcodes, write some assembly programs to test them out, and then add more.

---

By the time I sat down and wrote an emulator, I had taken courses on the architecture of a CPU! And yet writing this one piece of software fundamentally changed my understanding of how computers work at a basic level. Computers are obviously far more complicated than the toy examples I'm suggesting, but advances like branch prediction and caching did not fall out of a coconut tree; they exist in the context of all that came before them.

Concepts like [Return-Oriented Programming](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Dcj19KGKWM) require a strong ability to _reason about_ how machine code is executed. Working with computers at the lowest level through emulator development helped me develop this reasoning ability far better than a class would.

Another underrated skill in software development (that I especially think isn't taught well!) is reading a datasheet and translating that to a software implementation. Writing software in the real world involves working with lots of weird protocols with documentation of varying quality: on Rover I work with tons of random sensors and modules, at work I write code that communicates with lasers with protocols that vary widely between "very reasonable" to "moderately insane," and in personal projects I frequently find myself reaching to implement communication with a part that lacks a comprehensive library. While implementing my emulator, I reached for datasheets, schematics, and any documentation I could find. And where the docs weren't clear, I was forced to find ways to answer questions about the protocol experimentally.

---

When I started, it felt like almost all resources I found on emulator development tried to talk me out of it:

> Good knowledge of the chosen language is an absolute necessity for writing a working emulator, as it is quite complex project, and your code should be optimized to run as fast as possible. Computer emulation is definitely **not** one of the projects on which you learn a programming language.
>
> \- ["How To Write a Computer Emulator" by Marat Fayzullin](http://fms.komkon.org/EMUL8/HOWTO.html)

Writing an emulator was my first project in the Rust programming language, and I don't regret it at all. An emulator forces you to think deeply about your code's structure: in the real world, retro computers reused chips for different purposes, split functionality across different parts of the system, and were generally full of leaky abstractions. How do you write a program which encapsulates that structure? Mirroring the structure exactly [a la MAME](https://www.mamedev.org/about.html) leads to convoluted code, but building too many abstractions leads to quite complex data flow. And if you're anywhere near as much of a perfectionist as me, you'll rewrite each component at least three times, agonizing over the small details and using every tool your programming language offers you. And each time you rewrite it, you'll learn something.

It is my belief that there is no single project which introduces you to the good, the bad, and the ugly aspects of a programming language than an emulator.

---

In classes, computer science assignments are typically _rigidly defined_ (you're given an exact set of functionality to implement) and _small-scope_ (you write code once and never touch it again). There's great value in just sitting down by yourself a few times a week and building something: not knowing what exactly you're making nor what "done" even looks like. Being self-guided is an incredibly useful skill: in the real world, you won't have assignment descriptions or TAs to guide you to a solution, and there's often no exact description of what a solution looks like. Going from nothing to a functional, complex emulator shows mastery over this skill.

Large-scope projects are also fundamentally different to work on. While I'm all for building small, toy projects to learn technologies or solve simple problems, they don't help you learn how to structure a program. While group work can help, I'd make the case that it's better to learn design patterns in a solo project since you'll never encounter a pattern you aren't comfortable with. An emulator is usually a large enough project that you can't fit the entire thing in your head at once, meaning you'll need to rely on good design to help you navigate it.

---

Realistically, the code you're writing probably looks nothing like an emulator. Maybe you're doing frontend development, or writing a backend CRUD app, or even doing some embedded work. That said, I hope I've made the case for how writing an emulator is an immensely useful exercise regardless of the flavor of software development you do.
