---
title: Reflections on Four Years of Rover
description: After four years and five competitions, what have I learned?
tags: [software, rover, urc]
---

As many of you may know, I've been involved with the [Northeastern University Mars Rover Team](https://www.northeasternrover.com/) for four years now. We compete each year in the [University Rover Challenge](https://urc.marssociety.org/) and occasionally the [Canadian International Rover Challenge](https://circ.cstag.ca/). I personally have competed in four URC events and one CIRC event, and will (hopefully!) be competing at the upcoming URC and CIRC events this summer.

Here's our latest System Acceptance Review video, which gives some context for the team structure and the subsystems we develop.

<YouTube id="9GoSA4WFsdQ" />

Rover has largely dominated my college experience. Late nights in the lab have been a staple of all four years of my college life. During my co-op searches, rover has consistently been the only thing any interviewer has ever wanted to talk to me about. While the club has occasionally gotten overwhelming, I have no regrets about pouring as much energy and effort into the team as I have.

This post is a collection of things I learned from my time on the team and reasons why experiences like this are valuable. This section is written from my perspective as a software developer, but the general principles apply across the engineering disciplines.

# Thinking across disciplines

It's critical to work with engineers outside the software field, for two reasons: it helps you teach others about software, and it helps you learn about other forms of engineering.

As an early career software developer, you might never work with anyone outside the software field unless you seek those situations out. Even if classes require team assignments, they are typically done exclusively by students majoring in computer science. Furthermore, many internships on large software teams don't involve any communication with those outside the software team. During my 6-month co-op at Amazon Robotics, I can't point to a single issue in which I had to work deeply with someone with expertise outside of embedded software in order to solve a technical problem. That's a shame, since communicating across disciplines is a critical skill for solving problems in the real world.

The other advantage of an experience like the rover team is that it allows you to develop an understanding of fields outside your core strengths. While on rover, I did electrical work, replaced and installed mechanical parts, and even got involved in our filming team for our System Acceptance Review video. My greatest regret on the team is not learning SolidWorks. The base level understanding of electrical and mechanical engineering I developed has come in handy countless times over the years.

# Hands-on experience

My university is (somewhat) unique in that it encourages students to participate in 6-month "co-ops" instead of 4-month internships. They pride themselves on this "experiential learning" approach, and one could assume that it diminishes the importance of developing hands-on experience through clubs. However, I would argue the opposite: co-op program participants benefit greatly from hands-on club experience at least as much as those on a traditional internship schedule.

One reason is that club experiences give members a much broader range of fields and topics to study. Co-op projects are often small, self-contained, and confined to a small field and area of the product. In clubs like the rover team, you can choose as many or as few topics as you like to learn about and dive deep into. Clubs like the rover team have countless subsystems and components, both hardware and software, which need to be integrated; with members leaving every four years, there are plenty of opportunities to become the team expert in a particular system.

During my time on the rover team, I became the "expert" on our command and control interface (since rewriting it happened to be my first project), our radio system (since I was in the right place at the right time to troubleshoot it at my first competition), our camera streaming system (since I arranged to take over development on it after the previous experts graduated), and our migration to ROS 2 (since I was in a leadership position at the time we migrated). Unless you work at an early-stage startup, it's difficult to develop this breadth of expertise in a corporate environment.

Similarly, engineering clubs allow members to be part of high-level design decisions and planning steps that are often opaque to interns and co-op students. The design of large-scale software systems is a critical skill often not taught well in classes. You can study design patterns all day long, but putting that knowledge into practice is a skill that takes, well, practice.

Another advantage of club experiences that it teaches you software development practices _before_ you go on an internship or co-op. I am always amazed at the number of extremely smart Northeastern students who have no experience with Git, pull request workflows, how to leave a code review, or other critical steps in the software development process until their first co-op. While Northeastern does have a class which covers these, it is taught too late and in too little detail. While you could make the argument that teaching these skills is the purpose of a co-op, it often doesn't work like that in practice: small companies may employ poor software development practices, large companies like Google or Amazon use their own bespoke workflows unlike others in the industry, and students don't always get the chance to leave code reviews themselves.

# Leadership and collaboration

Working on a 4 person team is quite different from working on a 40 person team, and a 40 person team is quite different from a 400 person team. My rover team had around 40 active members at a given time. I think this number is about perfect for a few reasons:

- It's a large enough group of people that a hierarchical team structure is necessary to be productive. Members need to be split into subteams, subteams need leads, and subteam leads need a team lead. No one person can hold all of the expertise about the system in their head at any given time.
- It's a small enough group of people that becoming the expert in a subsystem or rising into a leadership position is very possible for all incoming members.

I'm sure I'm far from the first person to point out that personal projects are no substitute for building things with others, but it's true! Going directly from personal work to working 40 hours a week on a team is a jarring transition for many. Although software courses try to remedy this with teamwork assignments, there is no substitute for the experience gained working with a large team over multiple years.

# It's fun!

My final reason is that rover development work and competition is fun as hell. If the only software development work I did was for classes or co-op, I worry I would lose interest quickly in the field. Personal projects can be fun to develop as well, but nothing compares to the shared sense of comradery, triumph, and accomplishment I experienced on the rover team.
